


\backmatter
\fancyhead[RE]{}
\fancyhead[LO]{SUMMARY}


Summary
=======

The topic of this thesis is the determination of a three-dimensional structure of outer membrane protein G (OmpG) from *E. coli* in its native lipid environment by solid state magic-angle-spinning (MAS) NMR. For this purpose, it was necessary to develop and test new methods for enabling resonance assignments, the collection of distance restraints as well as methods for structure calculation. The lipid bilayer is thought to influence structure and function of membrane proteins, and one of the advantages of solid-state NMR over other methods in structural biology is that this technique allows membrane proteins to be studied in their native environment.

OmpG is a porin in the outer membrane of *E. coli* and has a molecular weight of 34 kDa, with 281 amino acid residues forming a β-barrel composed of 14 strands. The sequence of OmpG is longer than that of most other proteins of which a structure was solved so far by solid state MAS NMR. Since the complexity of NMR spectra increases with the number of amino acids in a protein, OmpG is a challenging system, requiring the development of new assignment strategies. Furthermore, it is an appropriate test system to benchmark the effectiveness of new NMR experiments.

First attempts to assign OmpG were made using ^13^C-detected spectra, as this was the most common detection method in solid-state NMR at the time this project was started. To reduce spectral overlap and the ambiguity of cross-peak assignment, a set of amino acid-specifically ^13^C-labeled OmpG samples was produced. This set included samples where only a few amino acids at a time were labeled, such as GAVLS, GAFY and RIGA. The spectra recorded of these samples offered a starting point for the sequential assignment. Other labeling schemes tested were based on the specific carbon labeling pattern obtained when glycerol labeled either on the first and third carbon positions (1,3-glycerol) or the second carbon position (2-glycerol) is used as the sole carbon source during protein expression. Combining the glycerol labeling method with a reverse labeling strategy, two more schemes were produced, in which a specific set of amino acids was labeled following the 1,3- or 2-glycerol labeling pattern: 1,3- and 2-TEMPQANDSG and 1,3- and 2-SHLYGWAFV. These samples allowed the initial assignment to be extended. However, it was not possible to arrive at an assignment to such an extend that structure determination became possible, using ^13^C-detected experiments alone.

In recent years, solid-state NMR has seen enormous progress. The availability of perdeuterated and partially back-exchanged protein samples and fast spinning probes has opened up the possibility to detect protons. Using this strategy, a set of spectra was recorded on perdeuterated and partially back-exchanged samples of OmpG, where all amino acids were as well ^15^N/^13^C-labeled. The set of ^1^H-detected experiments allows the assignment of the amide ^1^H and ^15^N, Cα and Cβ resonances and greatly simplifies the assignment strategy.

It is a characteristic of the methodology developed in this thesis that data from the deuterated samples were evaluated together with data obtained on amino acid-selectively labeled samples in order to arrive at a trustful assignment. The Cα and Cβ chemical shifts obtained from ^1^H-detected spectra were used to find corresponding peak patterns in the ^13^C-detected spectra, giving access to side-chain ^13^C chemical shifts. The knowledge of side-chain ^13^C chemical shifts results in more specific amino acid typing, which further facilitated the sequential assignment. Furthermore, cross-peaks in the ^13^C-detected spectra, provide extra evidence that a sequential assignment is correct. With this combined approach, using information from ^13^C- and ^1^H-detected spectra, residues in the regions of the sequence that correspond to the membrane-embedded β-barrel could be assigned.

Using these assignments and distance restraints from a set of through-space correlation experiments between carbons and protons, the structure of OmpG in its native lipid environment could be calculated. Ambiguous distance restraints were disambiguated using the ambiguous restrain iterative assignment (ARIA) protocol. The final structure has a backbone rmsd of ~1.6 Å for the residues in the β-sheets and closely resembles the structure calculated before using solution NMR. The structure deviates from available crystal structures in the extra-cellular part of the protein. In this part of the protein, the structure calculated here shows large flexible loops, like in the solution NMR structure. In contrast, in the crystal structures the β-sheets are extended and on most strands, only small turns, instead of loops, remain. This can be explained by crystal contacts stabilizing the extended structure.

The progress made in our OmpG project allows to design further experiments that yields more insight into the pH-dependent opening and closing mechanism of the porin. Furthermore, the new methodology presented here and verified by the successful structure determination of a membrane protein in its native lipid environment opens up the way to structural investigations of proteins under similar sample conditions.